Add end-user documentation for dask-gateway (#228)
2i2c-org/docs: user/howto/launch-dask-gateway-cluster.md

:::{admonition} What's the difference between Dask and Dask Gateway
:class: note
When using Dask on a local machine, you will often instantiate a cluster using
```python
from dask.distributed import LocalCluster
cluster = LocalCluster()
client = cluster.get_client()
```
For a 2i2c Dask hub, we instantiate a cluster with Dask Gateway that requests cloud resources with Kubernetes from a shared, centrally managed cluster environment.
:::

## Usage

This section roughly follows the [Dask Gateway Docs – Usage](https://gateway.dask.org/usage.html) together with the [Training on Large Datasets](https://examples.dask.org/machine-learning/training-on-large-datasets.html) example.

:::{warning}
Avoid large, long-running, idle clusters, which consume cloud computing resources and costs. Only use a cluster when you need it and shutdown when not in use.
:::

### Connect to a dask-gateway server

Create a gateway client to communicate with the dask-gateway server.

```python
from dask_gateway import Gateway

> gateway = Gateway()  # Use values stored in your local configuration (recommended)

Reviewer: "stored in your local configuration"

This sounded a bit like it mean the community's pre-configured configuration or similarly - but this is clarified below in the note so its quite fine anyhow.

Author: ```suggestion
gateway = Gateway()  # Uses values configured for the 2i2c Dask hub (recommended)
```

Ah, I think that was a copy-paste from the Dask Docs!

```

:::{note}

> Leave the argument of the `Gateway()` constructor empty to use the default configuration for your 2i2c Dask hub which automatically supplies parameters such as `address`, `proxy_address`, `auth`, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Leave the argument of the `Gateway()` constructor empty to use the default configuration for your 2i2c Dask hub which automatically supplies parameters such as `address`, `proxy_address`, `auth`, etc. via environment variables.
```

It could perhaps be better to not add this technical detail to keep things briefer?

Author: ```suggestion
Leave the argument of the `Gateway()` constructor empty to use the default configuration for your 2i2c Dask hub (parameters such as `address`, `proxy_address`, `auth`, etc. will be automatically supplied to the `Gateway()` object)
```

I am going to leave this technical detail in our docs because it addresses the confusion in a FreshDesk ticket that I believe stems from the [Dask Gateway docs](https://gateway.dask.org/usage.html#connect-to-a-dask-gateway-server) telling users that `Gateway()` typically takes these parameters.

cluster
```

:::{note}
If a new gateway server needs to be started, then this process can take around 5 minutes to complete.
:::

#### Manual scaling

Manually scale the cluster size to a fixed number of workers.

1. Expand the *Manual scaling* dropdown in the cluster widget.
1. Select the number of workers.
1. Click {guilabel}`Scale` to confirm.

:::{image} media/dask-scaling-manual.png
:alt: Screenshot of an interactive cluster widget to configure manual worker scaling.
:align: center
:::

#### Adaptive scaling

Adapt the cluster size dynamically based on current load. This helps to scale up the number of workers when necessary but scale it down and save resources when not actively computing.

1. Expand the *Adaptive scaling* dropdown in the cluster widget.
1. Select the minimum and maximum number of workers.
1. Click {guilabel}`Adapt` to confirm.

:::{image} media/dask-scaling-adaptive.png
:alt: Screenshot of an interactive cluster widget to configure adaptive worker scaling.
:align: center
:::

(dask:connect-gateway)=
### Connect to the gateway cluster

Connect to the gateway cluster to start doing work with your workers.

```python
client = cluster.get_client()
client
```

> Make a note of the dashboard address of the form `service/...` to connect to the Dask dashboard.

Author: ```suggestion
Note the dashboard address of the form `/services/...` to connect to the Dask dashboard.
```

```python
import dask_ml.datasets
import dask_ml.cluster
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
```

Generate random datasets for k-means clustering analysis.

```python
X, y = dask_ml.datasets.make_blobs(n_samples=10000000,
                                   chunks=1000000,
                                   random_state=0,
                                   centers=3,)
X = X.persist()
X
```

Group the clusters with the k-means algorithm.

```python
km = dask_ml.cluster.KMeans(n_clusters=3, init_max_iter=2, oversampling_factor=10)
km.fit(X)
```

<video width="100%" autoplay loop muted>
  <source src="../../../_static/videos/dask-compute-kmeans.mp4" type="video/mp4" />
  <p>Video showing dask dashboard while computing k-means clustering.</p>
</video>

<br>

Plot the results.

```python
fig, ax = plt.subplots()
ax.scatter(X[::10000, 0], X[::10000, 1], marker='.', c=km.labels_[::10000],
           cmap='viridis', alpha=0.25);
```

:::{image} media/dask-plot-result.png
:alt: Plot of the k-means clustering results.
:align: center
:width: 75%
:::

### Shut down the cluster

> Shut down the cluster when in not in use to minimize the waste of computational resources and costs.

Author: ```suggestion
Shut down the cluster when not in use to minimize the waste of computational resources and costs.
```

```python
cluster.close()
```

## FAQs

- *What are the best practices for using Dask to scale computations?*

  Take a look at the [Dask - Best Practices](https://docs.dask.org/en/latest/best-practices.html) documentation for a guide to using Dask efficiently.

- *Why can't I choose the instance type for my cluster?*

  The default is `n2-high-mem16` for Google Cloud and `r5.4xlarge` for AWS, with a maximum of 16 CPUs available on each machine. These instance types are chosen so that there is a consistent node pool across all 2i2c Dask hubs and more efficient cluster resourcing.

- *Should I use manual or adaptive scaling?*

  We suggest starting with adaptive scaling to dynamically scale up the number of workers when necessary but scale down and save resources when not actively computing. Once you are confident about your code's performance, you can use the manual scaling for fine-grained control over the number of workers needed.

- *How do I choose the number of workers/resources per worker?*

>   Like any other scaling problem, the answer to this question is specific to the application code. As suggested in the [Dask - Besk Practices](https://docs.dask.org/en/latest/best-practices.html), start with a small subset of your data and evaluate performance using the Dask dashboard before scaling resources to the full dataset.

Author: ```suggestion
  Like any other scaling problem, the answer to this question is specific to the application code. As suggested in the [Dask - Best Practices](https://docs.dask.org/en/latest/best-practices.html), start with a small subset of your data and evaluate performance using the Dask dashboard before scaling resources to the full dataset.
```

- *Why are there limited options for CPU and memory resources per worker?*

  The limited options of 1/2/4/8/16 CPUs and associated memory requests are chosen to enable the most efficient use of the node pool available. Otherwise, for example, a user could accidentally request 51% of a machine's resources per worker so only 1 worker can fit on an entire machine. In this example, if 2 workers were needed for the computation then this increases cloud costs for the 2 machines required while potentially leaving 49% of resources idle per machine.
  
- *Why did my kernel die?*

  There can be many reasons for this, but the most common one when it comes to Dask is an out-of-memory error caused by committing data into memory that exceeds the available RAM limit. Try using Dask to scale computations on smaller datasets and write the intermediate results to disk in the {ref}`/tmp folder<filesystem:tmp>`.

> - *Which image should I use for the software environment?*

Reviewer: The user-server image needs `dask-gateway` installed for the dask-gateway client, and `distributed` for the client to interact with the dask-scheduler.

`dask-labextension` provides the dashboarding stuff on the left panel in jupyterlab, so that is also nice.

Author: Okay! I will expand on this in the suggestion below.

Author: Resolved in https://github.com/2i2c-org/docs/pull/228/commits/45fb24a55c622dd3ac00307fe4ccfc41cb258c99

>   There is no need to select which image to use on a 2i2c Dask hub – this choice is automatically made for you when you launch a server to ensure version consistency between the Dask user client and gateway server. If you need to add a few small packages to your environment that are not required by the Dask computations, then consider pip/conda installing them at the start of your session. This installation is temporary and you will need to do this each time you start new server on your hub. If you need extra software packages for all of your Dask workers, then they need to be available in the container specified in the cluster options. Contact [2i2c support](../../../support) in this instance.

Author: > ... almost any version of dask-gateway client works against any version of dask-gateway server, where the dask-gateway server version will be the latest available.

Huh interesting, I think this is contrary to what the Dask Gateway docs recommend:

"For an image to work with dask-gateway, it must have a compatible version of dask-gateway installed (we recommend always using the same version as deployed on the dask-gateway-server)." – https://gateway.dask.org/install-kube.html#using-a-custom-image.

> I think this is too general advice - we have worked to decouple us from being responsible for community's image maintenance but still are for a few communities.

Ah yes, I agree. I think what I needed to know is how does a userself-serve custom images for a Dask hub? Judging from the 2i2c dask-staging hub and Pangeo hubs, I can see that we can either use the configurator or the `Other...` dropdown selection 👍

>   There is no need to select which image to use on a 2i2c Dask hub – this choice is automatically made for you when you launch a server to ensure version consistency between the Dask user client and gateway server. If you need to add a few small packages to your environment that are not required by the Dask computations, then consider pip/conda installing them at the start of your session. This installation is temporary and you will need to do this each time you start new server on your hub. If you need extra software packages for all of your Dask workers, then they need to be available in the container specified in the cluster options. Contact [2i2c support](../../../support) in this instance.

Author: Resolved in https://github.com/2i2c-org/docs/pull/228/commits/45fb24a55c622dd3ac00307fe4ccfc41cb258c99

# Launch a dask-gateway cluster

This guide shows you how to launch a Dask gateway cluster for parallel and distributed computing.

:::{contents}
:depth: 2
:local:
:::

## What is Dask Gateway?

Dask Gateway allows users to launch clusters for scaling computations efficiently with more CPU and memory on cloud resources, without requiring direct access to the underlying Kubernetes backend of the 2i2c hub. Configuration, such as efficient cluster resourcing, authentication and security settings, is automatically handled for users to provide a consistent user experience across the hub.

> :::{admonition} What's the difference between Dask and Dask Gateway

Author: ```suggestion
:::{admonition} What's the difference between Dask and Dask Gateway?
```

:class: note
When using Dask on a local machine, you will often instantiate a cluster using
```python
from dask.distributed import LocalCluster
cluster = LocalCluster()
client = cluster.get_client()
```
For a 2i2c Dask hub, we instantiate a cluster with Dask Gateway that requests cloud resources with Kubernetes from a shared, centrally managed cluster environment.
:::

## Usage

This section roughly follows the [Dask Gateway Docs – Usage](https://gateway.dask.org/usage.html) together with the [Training on Large Datasets](https://examples.dask.org/machine-learning/training-on-large-datasets.html) example.

:::{warning}
Avoid large, long-running, idle clusters, which consume cloud computing resources and costs. Only use a cluster when you need it and shutdown when not in use.
:::

### Connect to a dask-gateway server

Create a gateway client to communicate with the dask-gateway server.

```python
from dask_gateway import Gateway
gateway = Gateway()  # Uses values configured for the 2i2c Dask hub (recommended)
```

:::{note}

> Leave the argument of the `Gateway()` constructor empty to use the default configuration for your 2i2c Dask hub (parameters such as `address`, `proxy_address`, `auth`, etc. will be automatically supplied to the `Gateway()` object via environment variables)

Author: ```suggestion
Leave the argument of the `Gateway()` constructor empty to use the default configuration for your 2i2c Dask hub (parameters such as `address`, `proxy_address`, `auth`, etc. will be automatically supplied to the `Gateway()` object via environment variables).
```

:::

### Configure cluster options

Specify options for your gateway cluster with the options widget.

```python
options = gateway.cluster_options()
options
```

:::{image} media/dask-options.png
:alt: Screenshot of an interactive options widget to configure gateway cluster options.
:align: center
:::

#### Cluster options

Instance type running worker containers
: This defaults to the machine type `n2-highmem-16` for Google Cloud and `r5.4xlarge` for AWS, with a maximum of 16 CPUs available.

Resources per worker container
: Select 1/2/4/8/16 CPUs and corresponding memory requests from a dropdown menu.

Image

> : User image on the client side is automatically defined to match the Dask gateway version on the server side.

Author: ```suggestion
: This defaults to the user image deployed on the Dask hub.
```

cluster
```

:::{note}
If a new gateway server needs to be started, then this process can take around 5 minutes to complete.
:::

#### Manual scaling

Manually scale the cluster size to a fixed number of workers.

1. Expand the *Manual scaling* dropdown in the cluster widget.
1. Select the number of workers.
1. Click {guilabel}`Scale` to confirm.

:::{image} media/dask-scaling-manual.png
:alt: Screenshot of an interactive cluster widget to configure manual worker scaling.
:align: center
:::

#### Adaptive scaling

Adapt the cluster size dynamically based on current load. This helps to scale up the number of workers when necessary but scale it down and save resources when not actively computing.

1. Expand the *Adaptive scaling* dropdown in the cluster widget.
1. Select the minimum and maximum number of workers.
1. Click {guilabel}`Adapt` to confirm.

:::{image} media/dask-scaling-adaptive.png
:alt: Screenshot of an interactive cluster widget to configure adaptive worker scaling.
:align: center
:::

(dask:connect-gateway)=
### Connect to the gateway cluster

Connect to the gateway cluster to start doing work with your workers.

```python
client = cluster.get_client()
client
```

> Note the dashboard address of the form `/services/...` to connect to the Dask dashboard.

Author: ```suggestion
Note the dashboard address of the form `/services/dask-gateway/clusters/...` to connect to the Dask dashboard later.
```

  
- *Why did my kernel die?*

  There can be many reasons for this, but the most common one when it comes to Dask is an out-of-memory error caused by committing data into memory that exceeds the available RAM limit. Try using Dask to scale computations on smaller datasets and write the intermediate results to disk in the {ref}`/tmp folder<filesystem:tmp>`.

- *Which image should I use for the software environment?*

  A Dask supported user image that includes `dask-gateway` and `dask-labextension` is available by default on a 2i2c Dask hub – this ensures compatability between the Dask user server, scheduler and workers. The `dask-gateway-server` is not required in the user image and is installed in the backend by 2i2c and maintained to the latest version.
  
- *How do I install software packages to my Dask hub environment?*

>    During code development, use the [Dask distributed built-in scheduler plugin](https://distributed.dask.org/en/latest/plugins.html?highlight=pipinstall#built-in-scheduler-plugins) `PipInstall` to pip install a set of packages on all Dask workers (see the [Pangeo docs](https://pangeo.io/cloud.html#dask-software-environment) for an example). However, this increases the time to start up each worker. During production, for best performance we advise adding the required software packages to the [Pangeo Docker image](https://pangeo-docker-images.readthedocs.io/en/latest/), ensuring that the key packages `dask-gateway` and `dask-labextension` for the Dask dashboard are included. See [Customize a community-maintained upstream image](../../admin/howto/environment/customize-image) and contact your hub admin to [Configure the hub with the configurator](../../admin/howto/configurator) or use [The "Other" choice](./specify-unlisted-image.md/#the-other-choice) in the image selection dropdown if available.

Author: ```suggestion
   During code development, use the [Dask distributed built-in scheduler plugin](https://distributed.dask.org/en/latest/plugins.html?highlight=pipinstall#built-in-scheduler-plugins) `PipInstall` to pip install a set of packages on all Dask workers (see the [Pangeo docs](https://pangeo.io/cloud.html#dask-software-environment) for an example). However, this increases the time to start up each worker. During production, for best performance we advise adding the required software packages to the [Pangeo Docker image](https://pangeo-docker-images.readthedocs.io/en/latest/), ensuring that the key package `dask-gateway` is included (and `dask-labextension` if you require the Dask dashboard). See [Customize a community-maintained upstream image](../../admin/howto/environment/customize-image) and contact your hub admin to [Configure the hub with the configurator](../../admin/howto/configurator) or use [The "Other" choice](./specify-unlisted-image.md/#the-other-choice) in the image selection dropdown if available.
```

>    During code development, use the [Dask distributed built-in scheduler plugin](https://distributed.dask.org/en/latest/plugins.html?highlight=pipinstall#built-in-scheduler-plugins) `PipInstall` to pip install a set of packages on all Dask workers (see the [Pangeo docs](https://pangeo.io/cloud.html#dask-software-environment) for an example). However, this increases the time to start up each worker. During production, for best performance we advise adding the required software packages to the [Pangeo Docker image](https://pangeo-docker-images.readthedocs.io/en/latest/), ensuring that the key package `dask-gateway` is included (and `dask-labextension` if you require the Dask dashboard). See [Customize a community-maintained upstream image](../../admin/howto/environment/customize-image) and deploy to the hub by contacting your hub admin to [Configure the hub with the Configurator](../../admin/howto/configurator) or use [The "Other" choice](./specify-unlisted-image.md/#the-other-choice) in the image selection dropdown if available.

Author: ```suggestion
   During code development, use the [Dask distributed built-in scheduler plugin](https://distributed.dask.org/en/latest/plugins.html?highlight=pipinstall#built-in-scheduler-plugins) `PipInstall` to pip install a set of packages on all Dask workers (see the [Pangeo docs](https://pangeo.io/cloud.html#dask-software-environment) for an example). However, this increases the time to start up each worker. During production, for best performance we advise adding the required software packages to the [Pangeo Docker image](https://pangeo-docker-images.readthedocs.io/en/latest/), ensuring that the key package `dask-gateway` is included (and `dask-labextension` if you require the Dask dashboard) – see [Customize a community-maintained upstream image](../../admin/howto/environment/customize-image) for guidance. Deploy your custom image to the hub by either contacting your hub admin to [Configure the hub with the Configurator](../../admin/howto/configurator) or use [The "Other" choice](./specify-unlisted-image.md/#the-other-choice) in the image selection dropdown if available.
```

# Launch a dask-gateway cluster

This guide shows you how to launch a dask gateway cluster for parallel and distributed computing.

:::{contents}
:depth: 2
:local:
:::

## What is Dask Gateway?

Dask Gateway allows users to launch clusters for scaling computations without requiring direct access to the underlying backend of the 2i2c hub (e.g. Kubernetes). Configuration, such as cluster resourcing, authentication and security settings, is managed by 2i2c engineering to ease deployment and provide a consistent user experience across the hub.

:::{warning}
Avoid large, long-running, idle clusters, which consume cloud computing resources and costs. Only use a cluster when you need it and shutdown when not in use.
:::

## Usage

This section roughly follows the [Dask Gateway Docs – Usage](https://gateway.dask.org/usage.html), however, the guide outlined here is specific to a 2i2c dask hub.

### Connect to a dask-gateway server

Create a gateway client to communicate with the dask-gateway server.

```python
from dask_gateway import Gateway
gateway = Gateway()
```

<!-- ## Which image should I use?

> Defaults to using the Pangeo image https://infrastructure.2i2c.org/topic/infrastructure/hub-helm-charts/#hub-helm-charts

Reviewer: The default is to use the user image used by the user server, this makes the user server, created dask scheduler, and created dask-workers all use the same image by default, and therefor not have version misalignment between dask software installed (unless in edge cases where things were installed in local home folders etc not mounted in dask-scheduler/dask-worker pods/containers.

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/2i2c-org/docs/pull/228/commits/5c4576c9204edcd9752c15f69691b98c977e9f54
